#Predicting MLB Win Totals From Team Statistics##GoalsBaseball, perhaps more than any other sport, is driven by data. For years, baseball has tracked many statistics, and fans have used those statistics to argue which player is better than another, even if they played decades apart.Due to the large number of games played each season, and the number of stats that have been collected each year, I wondered whether or not these stats could be used to predict win totals. After all, virtually everything that has an impact on the outcome of an individual game is tracked. My goal for this project was to see if it was possible to take various team statistics and use them to predict how many wins that team had that season.##Data SourcesFor this project, I used data from baseball reference. For example, the 2019 team statistics can be found [here.](https://www.baseball-reference.com/leagues/MLB/2019.shtml) I used the Team Standard Batting and the Team Standard Pitching tables, for each of the seasons from 1985-2019. This data contains one row for each team, as well as a league average row. The number of teams is not constant during this period, but rather varies from 26-30. The number of columns also varies somewhat, but for example the batting table for 2019 has 29 columns, while the pitching table has 36. I also use the Miscellaneous Team Info [2019 can be found here](https://www.baseball-reference.com/leagues/MLB/2019-misc.shtml) for each of these seasons, which also has a row for every team, and the 2019 table has 15 columns. For the final data used in the model, there are 87 columns. The training set has 806 rows, and the testing set has 202.##ResultsI used backward selection to build the model. The explained variance is 97.9%. When predicting the win totals from the test data, the model was off by an average of about .1 wins per prediction. The most wins the model was off by was 6.315 wins. The average is close to 0, and the highest variance is off by about 4%. The results of this model suggest to me that it is, in fact, possible to use stats from a season to predict win totals for that season.##Limitations and ConcernsAs mentioned, there are a tremendous amount of stats that are tracked for baseball. I was unable to include all of them. Some were intentionally excluded because they showed no relevance, but some I simply could not find, while others were only tracked for some seasons and not others. For this reason, there is a possibility that there are some meaningful stats that help to predict team win totals that are not included in this model. Furthermore, the game of baseball is incredibly complex. The model assumes a linear relationship between each of the predictors and the win total, which is to say that no interaction effect accounted for in the model. While the linear relationship seems like a decent fit, there is the chance that some or all of the predictors have complicated interaction effects with each other that are very difficult to detect. Finally, this model by itself has limited practical use. Even if it is able to relatively accurately predict the win total of a team based on the stats the team put up that season, it cannot be used to predict the win total for a future season, because it needs the stats from a season, and for the stats to exist, the games have to already played. However, this is not to say that this model serves no use whatsoever. While this model cannot be used to predict the win totals for future seasons, it can predict win totals for future seasons if fed predicted stats from another model. For example, if a model could predict the stats that every player would get in the upcoming season, those stats could be generated for every player, combined with all other players on each team to generate predicted season total stats. In that case, those predicted team stats could be used with this model to then predict future win totals.##FutureEverything can be improved, and I look to continue to find ways to improve the model by finding more stats or more connections between existing stats. Once I figure out how to predict player stats in a way that is even remotely reliable, I plan to make a model to do this, also, to then combine with this model, to see how well it does at predicting win totals for a future season.##RequirementsThis project was made in Python, using Jupyter. It uses the os, pandas, numpy, matplotlib, sklearn.model_selection, and statsmodels.api packages.